
Deep-Dive Explanation of Code Splitting in React

**
“Code splitting is a technique that improves the performance of a React application by breaking the JavaScript bundle into smaller pieces 
and loading those pieces only when required.

To understand why code splitting is important, it helps to start with how bundling normally works.
When we build a React application using tools like Webpack, Vite, or CRA, 
the bundler scans all our imports and combines everything — components, pages, libraries, utilities — into one big JavaScript file. 
For small applications, this is fine. But as an app grows, that single bundle becomes progressively larger, which slows down the initial page load.

And this initial load cost is paid even if the user never visits most of the pages.
 For example, a user might only need the Login page, 
 but the bundle also includes the dashboard, settings, admin panels, charts, and other heavy components. All of that downloads unnecessarily.”

⸻

Why this is a real problem

“A large initial bundle affects:
	•	Time to First Byte (TTFB) is fine, but
	•	Time to Interactive (TTI) increases because the browser must download, parse, and execute a huge JS file.
	•	On slow devices or connections, users see blank screens or delays.
	•	Bounce rate increases because users leave before the app becomes usable.

This becomes more serious in enterprise apps where pages include heavy UI libraries, charts, editors, or WYSIWYG components.”

⸻

How code splitting solves this

**“Code splitting lets us load only the code necessary for the current view, instead of loading everything upfront.

React offers built-in code splitting using React.lazy and Suspense.
React.lazy converts an import into a dynamic import, meaning that the component is downloaded only at the moment it is rendered.

”**

Example:

const Profile = React.lazy(() => import('./pages/Profile'));

“This tells React:
‘Don’t include the Profile page in the main bundle. Keep it in a separate chunk and load it only when required.’”

⸻

Using Suspense

“Since this loaded component is fetched asynchronously, React needs a fallback — something to show while the chunk is being downloaded. That’s where <Suspense> comes in.”

<Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
  <Profile />
</Suspense>

“Now, a user navigating to the Profile page will briefly see a loading UI while the browser fetches that JS chunk. This chunk is cached by the browser, so repeat visits are instant.”

⸻

Where code splitting is typically applied

**“The most common place to apply code splitting is in routing, because different routes naturally represent different chunks of the application.

For example, in an authenticated app:**
	•	Public bundle — Login, Signup, Forgot Password
	•	Private bundle — Dashboard, Settings, Reports
	•	Heavy bundle — Charts, Data Grids, Editors

These can all be split into separate chunks so the initial public bundle is very light.”

⸻

Why normal imports defeat code splitting

“If we use normal imports like this:

import Dashboard from './pages/Dashboard';
import Reports from './pages/Reports';

Webpack or Vite eagerly bundle all of those into the main bundle—even if those pages are behind authentication.
So even if the user never visits the Reports page, they still download it on the first load.

Lazy loading fixes this.”

⸻

Real-world example

“In one of my projects, we had a complex admin dashboard with charts, tables, and analytics screens. The initial bundle size was around 3 MB.
After applying route-based code splitting and lazy-loading heavy components like the chart library and WYSIWYG editor, the initial bundle dropped to ~600 KB.
This reduced the first-load time significantly—especially on mobile devices.”

⸻

Advanced techniques

“There are more advanced code-splitting patterns as well, such as:
	•	Component-level splitting for heavy utilities
	•	Splitting third-party libraries (e.g., moment.js, chart libraries)
	•	Prefetching — loads a chunk in the background when the browser is idle
	•	Preloading — loads important chunks earlier
	•	Conditional splitting — split only when a feature is enabled
	•	SSR-aware splitting with frameworks like Next.js

But the core idea remains the same: reduce initial JS execution cost by loading code on demand.”**

⸻

Summary — what interviewers really want to hear

“To summarize, code splitting is a performance strategy that ensures users only download the code they actually need.
React supports this natively using React.lazy and Suspense, and when implemented correctly — especially around routes — it dramatically improves initial load time, reduces bundle size, and creates a smoother user experience.”

⸻

If you want, I can also prepare:
	•	A super-short 20-second elevator pitch
	•	A Q&A format for interviewers
	•	A version focused on your real projects (CometChat, VCB)
	•	A visual diagram showing how chunks load

Tell me which version you want next.